Before we proceed any further, hear me speak. Speak, speak. You are all
resolved rather to die than to famish? Resolved. resolved. First, you know
Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people. We know't, we know't. Let us kill
him, and we'll have corn at our own price. Is't a verdict? No more talking
on't; let it be done: away, away! One word, good citizens. We are accounted
poor citizens, the patricians good. What authority surfeits on would relieve
us: if they would yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we
might guess they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear: the
leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to
particularise their abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge
this with our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I speak this in
hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge. Would you proceed especially
against Caius Marcius? Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.
Consider you what services he has done for his country? Very well; and could
be content to give him good report fort, but that he pays himself with being
proud. Nay, but speak not maliciously. I say unto you, what he hath done
famously, he did it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be content to
say it was for his country he did it to please his mother and to be partly
proud; which he is, even till the altitude of his virtue. What he cannot help
in his nature, you account a vice in him. You must in no way say he is
covetous. If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations; he hath faults,
with surplus, to tire in repetition. What shouts are these? The other side o'
the city is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol! Come, come. Soft!
who comes here? Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always loved the
people. He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so! What work's, my
countrymen, in hand? where go you With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I
pray you. Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have had inkling
this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in deeds. They
say poor suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we have strong arms too.
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours, Will you undo
yourselves? We cannot, sir, we are undone already. I tell you, friends, most
charitable care Have the patricians of you. For your wants, Your suffering in
this dearth, you may as well Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift
them Against the Roman state, whose course will on The way it takes, cracking
ten thousand curbs Of more strong link asunder than can ever Appear in your
impediment. For the dearth, The gods, not the patricians, make it, and Your
knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack, You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander The helms o' the state, who
care for you like fathers, When you curse them as enemies. Care for us! True,
indeed! They ne'er cared for us yet: suffer us to famish, and their
store-houses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers;
repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more
piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat us
not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear us. Either you must
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious, Or be accused of folly. I shall tell
you A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it; But, since it serves my
purpose, I will venture To stale 't a little more. Well, I'll hear it, sir:
yet you must not think to fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please
you, deliver. There was a time when all the body's members Rebell'd against
the belly, thus accused it: That only like a gulf it did remain I' the midst
o' the body, idle and unactive, Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments Did see and hear,
devise, instruct, walk, feel, And, mutually participate, did minister Unto the
appetite and affection common Of the whole body. The belly answer'd-- Well,
sir, what answer made the belly? Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus-- For, look you, I may make the
belly smile As well as speak--it tauntingly replied To the discontented
members, the mutinous parts That envied his receipt; even so most fitly As you
malign our senators for that They are not such as you. Your belly's answer?
What! The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye, The counsellor heart, the arm
our soldier, Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter. With other muniments
and petty helps In this our fabric, if that they-- What then? 'Fore me, this
fellow speaks! What then? what then? Should by the cormorant belly be
restrain'd, Who is the sink o' the body,-- Well, what then? The former agents,
if they did complain, What could the belly answer? I will tell you If you'll
bestow a small--of what you have little-- Patience awhile, you'll hear the
belly's answer. Ye're long about it. Note me this, good friend; Your most
grave belly was deliberate, Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd:
'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he, 'That I receive the general
food at first, Which you do live upon; and fit it is, Because I am the
store-house and the shop Of the whole body: but, if you do remember, I send it
through the rivers of your blood, Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o'
the brain; And,
